.TH FORMAT 3 "2026-07-19" "libctools" "libctools Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
println \- formatted output conversion and printing with implicit newline
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <libctools.h>
.HP
.BI "void println(const char *" format ", ...);"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR println ()
function writes output to the output stream. It automatically appends a newline character to the terminated output.
.PP
The
.I format
argument is a character string that contains formatting directives similar to those in
.BR printf (3).
.PP
This function provides environmental optimizations tailored across environments:
.SH STANDARD ENVIRONMENT (stdc)
When using the hosted standard environment library, the implementation guarantees thread safety and high throughput via the following mechanisms:
.IP \(bu 3
.B Thread Safety:
It internally wraps execution in
.BR flockfile (3)
and
.BR funlockfile (3)
to guarantee that concurrent logging from multiple threads does not interleave.
.IP \(bu 3
.B Fast-Path Rendering:
If the format string does not contain any format specifiers (no '%' characters), it bypasses the heavy
.BR vfprintf (3)
engine entirely and falls back to a high-speed raw write via
.BR fputs_unlocked (3).
.IP \(bu 3
.B Automatic Flushing:
Invokes
.BR fflush_unlocked (3)
implicitly before releasing the stream lock to ensure instant visibility during crash reporting or pipeline redirection.
.SH EMBEDDED ENVIRONMENT (embedc)
When linking against the freestanding embedded object layer, the implementation drops heavy standard infrastructure dependencies and runs under strict constraints:
.IP \(bu 3
.B Non-Recursive Stack Safety:
Integer parsing is written completely iteratively using a bounded static frame buffer. This entirely removes the risk of runtime stack exhaustion inside hardware interrupt service routines (ISRs) or small microcontrollers.
.IP \(bu 3
.B Heap Independence:
Zero dynamic memory allocation operations occur during printing.
.SH SECURITY
The function prototype enforces compile-time type-safety checks across both environments via the GCC
.BR __attribute__((format(printf, 1, 2)))
directive. The compiler evaluates format arguments at compilation time, generating warnings or errors if variations do not match specifications.
.SH RETURN VALUE
None.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR printf (3),
.BR flockfile (3)