.TH RING_BUFFER 3 "2026-07-15" "libctools" "libctools Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
ring_buffer_init, ring_buffer_is_empty, ring_buffer_is_full, ring_buffer_push, ring_buffer_pop \- lock-free embedded ring buffer FIFO queue
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <libctools.h>
.HP
.BI "void ring_buffer_init(ring_buffer_t *" rb ");"
.HP
.BI "bool ring_buffer_is_empty(const ring_buffer_t *" rb ");"
.HP
.BI "bool ring_buffer_is_full(const ring_buffer_t *" rb ");"
.HP
.BI "bool ring_buffer_push(ring_buffer_t *" rb ", uint8_t " data ");"
.HP
.BI "bool ring_buffer_pop(ring_buffer_t *" rb ", uint8_t *" data ");"
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions provide a lightweight, deterministic, lock-free First-In, First-Out (FIFO) queue designed specifically for resource-constrained, bare-metal, and embedded environments. 
.PP
The implementation utilizes a fixed-capacity circular array of size 64 to avoid dynamic memory allocation and minimize memory fragmentation. The lock-free behavior is safe for single-producer, single-consumer (SPSC) thread or interrupt contexts.
.PP
.BR ring_buffer_init ()
initializes the ring buffer structure pointed to by
.I rb
by setting the head and tail pointers to 0.
.PP
.BR ring_buffer_is_empty ()
returns 
.B true
if the buffer has no elements available to read, and
.B false
otherwise.
.PP
.BR ring_buffer_is_full ()
returns
.B true
if the buffer has reached its maximum capacity of 63 elements (one slot is reserved to distinguish between empty and full states), and
.B false
otherwise.
.PP
.BR ring_buffer_push ()
appends a byte of
.I data
to the tail of the buffer. If the buffer is full, the write is rejected and the function returns 
.BR false .
On success, it returns
.BR true .
.PP
.BR ring_buffer_pop ()
removes the oldest byte from the head of the buffer and stores it in the memory location pointed to by
.I data .
If the buffer is empty, the operation fails and the function returns
.BR false .
On success, it returns
.BR true .
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR ring_buffer_init ()
returns no value.
.PP
The status inquiry and transaction functions return
.B true
on success/affirmation, or
.B false
on failure/negation.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
box;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.BR ring_buffer_init (),
.BR ring_buffer_is_empty (),
.BR ring_buffer_is_full (),
.BR ring_buffer_push (),
.BR ring_buffer_pop ()
T}	Thread safety	Safe under SPSC
.TE
.SH EXAMPLES
Below is a simple usage snippet within an interrupt-driven UART driver:
.PP
.EX
#include <libctools.h>

ring_buffer_t rx_buffer;

void uart_init(void) {
    ring_buffer_init(&rx_buffer);
}

// Interrupt Service Routine (Producer)
void UART_RX_IRQHandler(void) {
    uint8_t byte = UART_READ_REG();
    ring_buffer_push(&rx_buffer, byte);
}

// Main processing loop (Consumer)
void process_incoming_data(void) {
    uint8_t next_byte;
    while (ring_buffer_pop(&rx_buffer, &next_byte)) {
        // Process byte
    }
}
.EE

.SH AUTHOR
Written by x0rkr (https://github.com/x0rkr).
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs and open issues on the GitHub repository:
.UR https://github.com/x0rkr/libctools/issues
.UE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR println (3),
.BR mempool (3)